# Homework 1

Robert Rose

## Problem 1

Exercises 3.8 and 3.9 on pages 107-108 of the DSC text.

### Exercise 3.8

Consider the bank database of Figure 3.19, where the primary keys are un-derlined. 
Construct the following SQL queries for this relational database.

#### a.

Find all customers of the bank who have an account but not a loan.

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT depositor.customer_name FROM depositor 
WHERE depositor.customer_name NOT IN(
    SELECT borrower.customer_name FROM borrower
);
```

#### b.

Find the names of all customers who live on the same street and in the same city 
as “Smith”.

```sql
SELECT C.customer_name FROM customer AS C
JOIN customer AS S using(customer_street, customer_city)
WHERE S.customer_name = "Smith"
```

#### c. 

Find the names of all branches with customers who have an account in the bank and
who live in "Harrison".

```sql
SELECT branch_name FROM account
NATURAL JOIN depositor NATURAL JOIN customer
WHERE customer_city = "Harrison"
```

### Exercise 3.9

Consider the employee database of Figure 3.20, where the primary keys are underlined.
Give an expression in SQL for each of the following queries.

#### a. 

Find the names and cities of residence of all employees who work for "First Bank
Corporation".

```sql

```

#### b.

Find the names, street addresses, and cities of residence of all employees who 
work for "First Bank Corporation" and earn more than $10,000.

```sql

```

#### c.

Find all employees in the database who do not work for "First Bank Corporation".

```sql

```

#### d. 

Find all employees in the database who earn more than each employee of "Small 
Bank Corporation".

```sql

```

#### e.

Assume that the companies may be located in several cities. Find all companies 
located in every city in which "Small Bank Corporation" is located.

```sql

```

#### f.

Find the company that has the most employees.

```sql

```

#### g.

Find those companies whose employees earn a higher salary, on average, than the 
average salary at "First Bank Corporation".

```sql

```
