# Homework 2

Robert Rose

## Problem 3

Exercises 3.11 and 3.12 (20 pts) from the DSC textbook

### Exercise 3.11

Write the following queries in SQL, using the university schema.

#### a.

Find the names of all students who have taken at least one Comp. Sci. course; 
make sure there are no duplicate names in the result.

```sql

```

#### b.

Find the IDs and names of all students who have not taken any course offering 
before Spring 2009.

```sql

```

#### c. 

For each department, find the maximum salary of instructors in that department. 
You may assume that every department has at least one instructor.

```sql

```

#### d. 

Find the lowest, across all departments, of the per-department maximum salary 
computed by the preceding query.

```sql

```

### Exercise 3.12

Write the following queries in SQL, using the university schema.


#### a.

Create a new course "CS-001", titled "Weekly Seminar", with 0 credits.

```sql

```

#### b.

Create a section of this course in Autumn 2009, with `sec_id` of 1.

```sql

```

#### c.

Enroll every student in the Comp. Sci. department in the above section.

```sql

```

#### d.

Delete enrollments in the above section where the student’s name is Chavez.

```sql

```

#### e.

Delete the course CS-001. What will happen if you run this delete statement 
without first deleting offerings (sections) of this course.

```sql

```

#### f.

Delete all `takes` tuples corresponding to any section of any course with the
word "database" as a part of the title; ignore case when matching the word with 
the title.

```sql

```